---
layout: post
title: "ye - kanye west."
author: "Katherine Perez and Ken Lin"
categories: tbt
tags: [tbt]
image:
 feature: ye-cover.jpg
---

# ye by Kanye West
Release Date: 06.01.2018

Genre Tags: hip-hop, bipolar, yeezy

<iframe src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/album/5EBGCvO6upi3GNknMVe9x9" width="600" height="380" frameborder="0" allowtransparency="true"></iframe>

Ken: Nowadays, it appears that Kanye has taken on the role of a creative visionary/director
rather than confining himself as a producer/rapper. This is inevitable as he explores
more ways to express himself as an artist: music (Producer, songwriter, and rapper),
fashion (Yeezy Szn), twitter rants (@kanyewest), and possibly film (Short film for his
upcoming collaboration album with Kid Cudi). I have always been interested in the
different artistic outlets Kanye uses to express himself.
After abruptly canceling The Life of Pablo tour, Kanye West remained relatively quiet
and away from the media's attention. However, this did not last forever as Kanye
became the center of controversies over the past months for saying "Slavery was a
choice", declaring support for US president Donald Trump, and wearing a "Make
America Great Again" hat. Nevertheless, the wait is over and Kanye is back with his
eighth, Wyoming-produced studio album that focuses on his mental health and family
life.

Katherine: Man, what a meme-able album cover. This album cover is just screaming to be memed. I'm not well versed in the Kanye world but I'm going to keep it like that for this review. I haven't listened to Graduation completely, or any of his other albums for that matter. Secondly, disclaimer: Ken made me review this, not that I don't like being made to do reviews. He’ll probably have a better perspective of this album relative to Kanye’s other works.

This album is a pretty short one, running for only 23 mins. Stylistically, I think these shorter albums have a smaller chance of containing “filler” tracks. This leaves the artist to tighten the focus of the entire album. Now, onto the album...

### I Thought About Killing You

Katherine: Act I: this song's long, introductory monologue is his soliloquy to himself. The words recited by the warped voice reveals another inner layer to what he wants to convey. The change in pitch to a deeper voice reflects his deep, inner thoughts. These thoughts are probably hard to admit. He worries about the perception of talking about these things.
>I think this is the part where I'm supposed to say somethin' good <br/>
> To compensate it so it doesn't come off bad <br/>
> But sometimes I think really bad things <br/>
> Really, really, really bad things <br/>


> Premeditated murder

This said again in this low, deep voice, are the parting words of the first section of this song.

Act II: The soliloquy ends and he switches topics at the mark of a single, bass beat. The song slowly introduces percussive instruments which helps it transition into a more upbeat tempo. In the previous section, the focus was more reflective and introspective. In this section, we focus more on his actions and his outrospective thoughts.

Ken: The track begins with "The most beautiful thoughts are always besides the darkest",
which seems too good to not be a reference to "My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy".
This is possibly addressing Kanye's bipolar disorder which was explicitly mentioned on
the album cover. This line is part of a monologue of Kanye speaking over a repeated,
droning beat that sounds like heavily processed vocal. This monologue threw me off a
bit as it's more than a spoken speech - it actually has a verse-chorus-verse structure
and lasts over 2 minutes . And for a moment, I was led to believe the entire album will
be Kanye speaking into a mic instead of rapping (Good thing that wasn't the case lol).
More than half way through the song, the beat transitions into this minimalist, eerie
beat that reminds me of Pusha T's "If You Know You Know". This would make some
sense since Kanye produced both "Ye" and "Daytona".
It is interesting for Kanye to start off the album with a monologue that would throw most
people off. This really forces the listener to focus on what Kanye has to say. I was
tempted to believe the "You" in the song refers to the fanbase, but upon further
reflection I do not think it has to be a literal human figure at all. Since the overall
album revolves around Kanye growing as a person for the better and being more self-aware,
the "You" may very well refer to a human flaw Kanye recognized in himself.

### Yikes

Ken: On this song, we see Kanye swings back and forth between the highs and lows of his
bipolar disorder. It almost seems as if there are different Kanye's throughout the
song: the rapping-Kanye is aggressive and raw, while the singing-Kanye is self-aware
and worried of his maniacal outbursts. The flow on this song is a bit simplistic and not
terribly interesting, although Kanye's delivery and tone do make me feel like I'm
getting inside the head of a lunatic.

Katherine: Kanye has a very strong superhero theme going on, probably to find solace in something that could be seen as a weakness. We hear a lot about drugs in this one and their influences. The song doesn't have an overall aggressive sound, but there is the section here:
> Shit could get menacin', frightenin', find help <br>
> **See, this is why all the bitches fuck with Ye!** <br>
> **Fuck what they talk about!** <br>
> Sometimes I scare myself, myself <br>
> **They take me on meds, off meds, ask yourself** <br>
> Shit could get menacin', frightenin', find help <br>
> **Ask your homegirl right now, "Look, you had a shot at Ye?"** <br>
> Sometimes I scare myself, myself <br>
> **You'd drop everything!** <br>

It sounds like a 1v1 battle with Kanye vs. Kanye, also repeating this in the outro. I find this as the more interesting part of the song. I agree with what Ken said, pretty meh for the rest. Yikes.

### All Mine

Ken: The structure of this song is very straightforward: chorus-verse-chorus-verse-chorus. Kanye makes it clear that he is asserting his sexual desire and dominance in All Mine. I am not sure how I feel about some of the bars on here, such as "None of us would be here without cum" and "I love your titties 'cause they prove I can focus on two things at once". It reminds me of Kanye rapping about bleached assholes in Father Stretch My Hands Pt. 1 on the last album. As of now I am definitely leaning more towards calling these bars as whack because I still cringe a little on the inside when I hear those lines. One highlight on this song, however, is definitely the distorted, blown-out "Ayy" sound effect in the background.

Katherine: The low, almost organ-like introduction makes this song feel sorta more solemn, but the contents of this song are anything but. (Low-key tho: pipe her up could be related to the beginning of this song bc organs are referred to as pipes)

Ant Clemons's parts are the catchiest for sure. That "medulla oblongata" part and the part that follows is (100 emoji) (fire emoji). Kanye describes how infidelity is more of a natural reaction than a conscious choice. He extends the functioning of the medulla oblongata, which controls involuntary bodily functions, to sexual desire. I also think the lamp metaphor was kinda clever.

### Wouldn't Leave

Ken: I really enjoy all the beautiful singing on this song, especially the chorus with PARTYNEXTDOOR. Throughout the song, we hear this subtle, glittering keyboard sound effect that adds a gentle touch to the mood. The slow and soothing drum pattern sounds very organic and adds that much more honesty to what Kanye is saying. The stark contrast between the tone and message of the last song makes Wouldn't Leave that much more impactful.

Katherine: The positioning of this song after All Mine is critical. This covers an almost opposite topic to the previous one. This song is quite sentimental (maybe mildly cheesy):
> One and one is two, but me and you, that's infinity

The phrase "And I know you wouldn't" that lingers through this song, just reiterates the confidence that he has that Kim wouldn't leave him. It's a confidence with the utmost gratitude towards her.

### No Mistakes

Ken: This song only has one verse and is by far the shortest song on this album. In this song Kanye addresses his resurgence as an artist after his mental breakdown during the
2016 tour. This was a dark period of time where Kanye was surrounded by controversies (More than usual, I guess), with many news outlets claiming that he was going bankrupt. Kid Cudi singing the hook is absolutely infectious and my personal favorite on his album. Kanye's vocal performance is punchy, to-the-point, and
effective. My favorite bars are the ones where he throws shade at Drake (Supposedly?) and compares himself to hip-hop legend Ice Cube. To me this song feels like Kanye's triumphs as an artist, as in no matter how hard he falls he will always come back stronger.

Katherine: "Stronger" like this, Ken?

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/PsO6ZnUZI0g" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>

We continue on this theme from the previous song, that he continues to express his gratitude for his wife. The chorus feels even more impactful than the one in "Wouldn't Leave".

I also do like the beginning of the verse, it really sets the mood. I can even imagine myself in a convertible as he is singing these lyrics. It puts me in a feelsgoodman vibe.

### Ghost Town

Katherine: I **LOVE** the intro to this one. Beginning with the clanky, bright piano sample. The sample mentions “Someday I'll, I wanna wear a starry crown.” The full song, "Someday" by Shirley Ann Lee, is mostly just this sample. The rest of the song talks about song structure (pretty meta tbh).

>  let me the music do something, then do that again, that'd be enough for a record <br>
> You would't need to add a whole lot of
So, this would be, uh, better on a lot of songs not to have a whole lot of things, just something simple so somebody can listen in and enjoy, you know... <br>
> The melody and something simple...
When it get too many then they can't remember it and then they lose interest <br>

Kanye mirroring "Someday" transitions the song into its modern counterpart. In the sample of "Someday", the starry crown reflects his want to be revered, to be a King, the best.
The vibe of this song reflects a very relaxed mood. This is a pretty heartfelt song...and I can't help but sing to it. I think the overall message of this song is pretty powerful as well.  

Ken: Personally, I think the song is about Kanye reflecting on the consequences of his self-destructing behaviours. In his verse, Kanye comes off as very emotional and personal, and he is almost singing at certain times. I really dig the use of guitar in this song - it helps the track to build up an epic feeling for the listener, especially in the last verse.

Kat: The guitar in this song definitely brings a fresh sound to what we've been listening to so far. The guitar looms, drifts and becomes more intense to guide the emotional build-up of this song.

Ken: At first I could not take the song too seriously because of the line about

> [putting] my hand on the stove

but now I see it as describing a vulnerable feeling that most of us can relate to - being hurt so deeply that you go numb and lose touch with reality.

Kat: I think this outro is a very important one. He mentions being a child and letting it all go. This is just a feeling that he longs for, that unhindered mindset of the child. Unhindered by social constructs and the child is free to come up with whatever they please. The hand on the stove thing: you know when you were a kid and didn't know that touching the hot stove would result in pain? I think he's trying to modernize that by saying we know that putting your hand on the stove results in pain, but we still do it anyway to see if we have overcome that effect. And "when nothing hurts anymore", you've numbed yourself to the idea of pain (or any other idea really) and you are finally liberated.

Ken: On another note, I am still not sure what the off-beat laser sound is all about and it still throws me off whenever I listen to the song.

Kat: About the laser thing, the only thing that I can think of is that it makes it kinda sound futuristic. And that this liberating feeling is what he is expecting or would want in the future. We were in the past with the sample, in the present with the majority of this song, and the future with the outro. I just love this song, man.

### Violent Crimes

Katherine: The soft piano in this song makes this song the most relaxing one out of all the songs in this album. The light, sustained piano in the cuts the edges off this song, even as Kanye raps. It's a nice conclusion to the entire album, since he summarizes the impact of the women in his life.

Ken: As a closer, we get a heartwarming track about Kanye's change in perspectives on women and family life. There is nothing braggadocious in this track. This isn't the first time Kanye raps about how having a daughter will change a man's perspectives on women. In "We Major", Kanye raps

> Until you have a daughter, that's what I call karma

However, it is ironic that Kanye mentions
> Father, forgive me, I'm scared of the karma

Kanye has finally grown out of the person he used to be, but he is still afraid of his past wrongdoings catching up to him. The verse is honest, sincere, and clever all at once; I especially enjoy the callbacks to "Monster". The singing is calming and introspective, and the layered vocals towards the end reminds me of a church choir - a stylistic choice prevalent on "The Life of Pablo". The soothing voice makes the singing almost sounds like a lullaby, which complements the theme about children and growing up. I am glad that Kanye chose to explore this more slow-paced, heartfelt style of songwriting.

## Final Thoughts
Katherine: My top pick for this album is "Ghost Town". Can I just say I just wanted a *serious* version of "Lift Yourself" but it's okay. Poopidy scoop.

This album has many different juxtapositions from song to song and internally to each song, which strengthens the focus of this album. He covers topics surrounding his bipolar disorder well and I think the composition of this album is concise. Kanye is pretty damn good and sampling music as well. Just putting that out there. Even though the critical reception of this album is not as well-received as his prior albums, I still enjoyed listening to this one.

Ken: A few events surrounding the release of Ye caught my attention. Kanye West reportedly paid $85,000 for a picture of Whitney Houston's bathroom and asked Pusha T to use it as the cover art for his most recent album, Daytona. As for the cover art of Ye, Kim Kardashian said his husband took a photo using his cellphone on his way to the listening party for Ye in Wyoming. Moreover, on the 4th track of Ye, Wouldn't Leave, Kanye raps "I said slavery a choice. They said hi Ye", which means the lyrics were written relatively recently. I find these events particularly interesting because of how last-minute and spontaneous they are. Kanye is famously known to have spent over 5,000 hours on the making of Power, and now he is making last-minute changes to not just his own album but also someone else's. I believe the lyrics on Ye suffered
as a result of this spontaneity from Kanye, and this is my biggest problem with this album. But who knows, maybe Kanye will make changes to Ye in the future just like he did with The Life of Pablo. Overall, I still really enjoy this new direction Kanye is going after and I can't wait to hear more.

KENTHONY LINTANO: FAV TRACKS: GHOST TOWN, NO MISTAKES.

Katherine: I think should listen to his other albums now.
